Well, who's your fans since the last time we gathered?
IU won the national championship.
That's a pretty great moment.
Congratulations.
It's also divisional round weekend in the NFL.
And if you're here today online, you already know we got snowed in too.
And like many of you, I've been watching all of this unfold from a bit of a distance as far as football goes because my favorite team in the plane.
We're not even in the championship conversation this year and haven't been for a minute, but something unexpected and really meaningful caught my attention over the last few weeks.
The Bengals fan community is a pretty tight knit group.
There's a lot of interaction between fans and the journalists who cover the team.
And recently one of those longtime reporters experienced a sudden and devastating loss, the unexpected death of his spouse.
And in response, fellow journalists set up a GoFundMe to help cover the financial burden the family was facing.
And almost immediately the response from the fan community was overwhelming.
Messages of support, stories of gratitude, generosity pouring in from people who didn't have to do anything but they just wanted to.
And I found myself watching that unfold and I felt something stirring in me too.
I wish I could say that I jumped in right away, but it didn't.
What moved me was seeing how much good was happening, seeing people show up, seeing kindness ripple outward.
And eventually I wanted to be part of that too, even if it was just a small gift and in a small way.
And it reminded me of something important.
There's a kind of generosity that doesn't come from pressure, comes from joy.
From belonging, from seeing something good and wanting to help it continue.
There's something life giving about being part of something bigger than yourself, about participating in care, hope and restoration.
And what struck me is that none of that generosity had to be forced.
Grace was already at work and people simply responded to it.
And that's actually what brings us to today.
But we're in the final week of our series, The Generous Light.
And today we're going to look at two passages in Second Corinthians that speak directly to why Christians give.
And what we'll see is that God doesn't call us to generosity through obligation or compulsion, but he invites us into generosity through grace, through joy.
through a desire to see his work, not just survive, but to thrive in the world.
And that instinct to respond freely to grace rather than pressure is exactly what Paul points to when he begins talking about generosity in the early church.
So our first passage, I'm gonna break this up into four smaller sections.
It's gonna be in 2 Corinthians 8, 1, 3, 4, and this is what all writes.
He says, we want you to know brothers and sisters about the grace of God that was given to the churches of Macedonia.
During a severe trial brought about by affliction, their abundant joy and their extreme poverty overflowed in a wealth of generosity on their part.
I can testify that according to their ability and even beyond their ability of their own accord,
They begged us earnestly for the privilege of sharing in the ministry to the saints.
Now, Paul opens this section in a surprising way.
He does an issue of command and he doesn't apply pressure.
Instead, he tells a story about the churches in Macedonia.
And it's not a success story by worldly standards, at least, because Paul describes them as experiencing severe affliction.
and extreme poverty, language that literally means rock bottom poverty.
These were not churches with margin.
They were communities under pressure, likely facing persecution, social exclusion, and even economic hardship because of their faith.
And yet Paul says this.
He says, their abundant joy and their extreme poverty overflowed in a wealth of generosity.
And that sentence should stop us in our tracks.
Joy does not normally flow from affliction.
Generosity does not normally flow from poverty, unless something else is at work.
And Paul's careful to name what that something is.
He doesn't credit personality, temperament, or strong leadership.
He says this generosity came from the grace of God that was given to them.
And grace didn't wait until their circumstances improved.
Grace met them in their hardship and grace empowered them to give beyond their ability voluntarily, even urgently.
And Paul says they begged for the privilege of participating.
And that word matters here.
Just think about it for a minute.
He uses the word privilege for the Macedonians, giving wasn't an obligation to fulfill.
It was a grace to participate in.
Their joy wasn't tied to what they had because they didn't really have anything.
It was tied to being caught up in what God was doing.
And Paul's already reframing generosity.
Giving doesn't flow from abundance.
It flows from grace.
And when grace takes root, it produces a generosity that circumstances the loan cannot explain.
So grace in Paul's language isn't a feeling
It's God actively supplying what his people need to participate in what he is doing.
Now he picks up the idea in 2 Corinthians 8, 5, or 9.
So let's continue on in Paul's logic here.
He writes, and not just as we had hoped, instead they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us by God's will.
So we urge Titus
that just as he had begun, so he should also complete among you this act of grace.
Now, as you excel in everything, in faith, speech, knowledge, and in all diligence, and in your love for us, excel also in this act of grace.
I am not saying this as a command, rather by means of diligence of others, I am testing the genuineness of your love.
For you know that the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ, though he was rich, or you're sick, he became poor.
So that by his poverty, you might become rich.
So Paul then tells us why the Macedonians gave the way that they did.
And he says something subtle, but decisive.
He says that they gave themselves first to the Lord and then to us by the will of God.
And that's the key.
Their generosity didn't start with money.
It started with surrender.
Their resources followed their devotion.
And then Paul grounds the entire appeal in the gospel itself.
He doesn't say give because others have less.
He says, and just in case the Corinthians or we start thinking, this is about heroic believers, Paul immediately takes us somewhere deeper.
He says, for you know the grace of our Lord Jesus Christ.
Though he was rich, yet for your sake, he became poor so that you by his poverty might become rich.
This is the theological center of the passage.
Paul doesn't motivate giving through guilt or comparison.
He motivates it through this theology word called Christology.
And Paul here has a very high Christology because Jesus is the ultimate model of generosity, not because he gave something, but because he gave himself.
The inequality that Paul points to is intentional.
Whatever the Corinthians might give, it will never rival what Christ has already given.
Grace always precedes generosity.
So Paul isn't commanding them to give.
He says he's testing the sincerity of their love.
Not to shame them, but to see whether grace has truly taken root.
Christian generosity and Paul's framework is never coerced.
It's always a response.
Grace received becomes grace embodied.
So moving ahead, the second Corinthians nine, six through seven, then Paul writes this.
He says, the point is this, the person who's so sparingly will also reap sparingly.
And the person who's so generously will also reap generously.
Each person should do as he has decided in his part,
not reluctantly or out of compulsion, since God loves a cheerful giver.
So in chapter nine, Paul returns to the heart behind the gift.
He uses a familiar agricultural image, sewing and reaping, but this is not a prosperity formula.
Paul is not promising that financial giving will result in financial gain.
Instead, he reframes abundance itself.
He makes us think about what it means to have abundance.
and to give abundantly.
He says, each person is to give what they have decided in their heart, not reluctantly or under compulsion.
Why?
Because God loves a cheerful giver.
And that doesn't mean that God loves cheerful people more.
It means God delights in generosity that grows out of freedom rather than fear.
And that matters very deeply to us.
Because Paul explicitly rejects manipulation, giving that flows from pressure
misses the point altogether.
The issue is not how much is given, but how it is given willingly, joyfully, freely.
And even here, Paul grounds generosity in grace.
The ability to give does not originate in the giver.
It originates in God.
Cheerfulness isn't manufactured.
It flows from trust that God is already at work.
This is sufficiency theology, not prosperity, theology or prosperity gospel.
God supplies enough so that generosity can continue, not so that wealth can accumulate without purpose.
And lastly, Paul writes in 2 Corinthians 9, 8 through 12 in our last section here.
He says, and God is able to make every grace overflow to you so that in every way,
always having everything you need, you may excel in every good work.
As it is written, he distributed freely.
He gave to the poor his righteousness endures forever.
Now, the one who provides seed for the sower and bread for food will also provide and multiply your seed and increase the harvest of your righteousness.
You will be enriched in every way for all generosity, which produces thanksgiving to God through us.
The ministry of this service is not only supplying the needs of the saints, but is also overflowing in many expressions of thanks to God.
So Paul closes where we begin with grace.
He says, God is able to make every grace overflow to you.
Notice the direction grace flows to believers and then through believers.
God provides seed to the sower and bread for food, and he multiplies that seed so that righteousness increases.
The result is not self-congratulation, it's Thanksgiving to God.
Paul insists that generosity is never merely a financial transaction.
It is a theological event.
God receives the glory because God is the source, and giving becomes participation in God's own generous character.
And Paul even anchors this in Israel's story.
He's echoing the manna and the wilderness where no one had too much and no one had too little.
God's provision created a community shaped by trust, not ordering.
And that's Paul's vision for the church, not that the wealthy become poor, but that no one is left without care, not that generosity is heroic, but that it is normal in a grace formed community.
A community where grace moves so freely that needs are met quietly, dignity is preserved, and God, not the giver, gets the credit.
And when Paul finishes, we see this full circle, grace initiates the process and grace sustains it, and then grace completes the process.
Generosity is not something Christians try harder to do.
It's something grace forms us to become.
And that's why our bottom line today is this.
Grace receives always becomes grace given, not perfectly, not uniformly, but genuinely.
And when it does, God's character is reflected.
God's people are cared for and God receives the glory.
So before we rush to what we should do with this, we need to pause and ask what it's revealing about us.
Grace doesn't expose our hearts to shame us.
It exposes them to heal us.
Most of us don't cling to what
We have because we're greedy.
We cling because we're afraid.
Afraid there won't be enough.
Afraid we won't be okay.
Afraid that if we loosen our grip, something will fall apart.
When Paul's reminding us that generosity isn't about proving anything to God, it's about discovering where we're already trusting Him and where we're still learning to.
So the question isn't how much should I give, as we've said throughout this series.
The deeper question is,
What grace have I already received?
And what is that grace forming in me?
And wherever that question lands for you today, eager, hesitant, maybe a little anxious, maybe even unsure, there's room for you here in this story.
So to conclude, one of the things that stayed with me as I've sat with these passages is how little pressure there is in the way that Jesus gives.
Notice he never coarses, he never shames, he never demands
before he offers himself for us.
Paul says, though he was rich, yet for your sake, he became poor, not because we were generous, not because we were faithful, but because he trusted the Father.
And because he loved us, and that does something to me personally, I don't know about you.
Because if I'm honest, there are moments when I look at generosity and others,
and say, man, I wish I were more like that.
I see the need, I feel that pull, but I also feel the limits.
I feel the tight margins that we're all facing in this day and age and that quiet anxiety that says, what if I give and it's not enough?
And when I keep realizing is this, God has been patient with me in this realm of life.
He hasn't rushed me.
He hasn't demanded I start at the highest level.
He simply invited me to stay present and to keep trusting him.
That's what grace does.
Grace doesn't start by asking how much can I give?
Grace starts by saying, come and receive.
And when we receive it slowly and perfectly and honestly, it begins to change what we want.
It reshapes our desires.
It creates room where their wants was fear.
That's why Paul can say grace received becomes grace given.
And this week, that may simply mean staying open to grace, trusting that when God supplies it, generosity will follow.
Not all at once, not always dramatically, but genuinely.
And I think that's especially important for those of you who are like me and are quietly anxious right now.
Those who want to be faithful but feel stretched in.
Those who worry that what you have won't matter or won't be enough.
Here's the good news.
God does not ask you to be impressive.
He does not ask you to be the best.
He does not ask you to give what you do not have.
He asks for your presence.
He asks for your care.
He asks for your trust.
Because when Jesus looks at us,
He's not first asking how much did you give?
He's asking, will you walk with me here?
And the same Jesus who gave himself freely, the same Jesus who trusted the Father with everything is still giving grace, patiently, abundantly and without coercion.
So if you leave today with anything, let it be this, you are not being pressured, you're being invited, invited to receive again,
his grace anew, invited to trust in him again, and invited to discover that grace, when it's truly received, always finds a way to be shared.